---
sidebar_label: "2018年8月実施 専門科目I 問題3"
tags:
  - Tokyo-University
---
# 東京大学 情報理工学系研究科 コンピュータ科学専攻 2018年8月実施 専門科目I 問題3

## **Author**
[kainoj](https://github.com/kainoj/utokyo-cs)

## **Description**
In the following, we represent a deterministic finite automaton as a quintuple $\mathcal{A} = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, F)$ (where $Q$ is a finite set of states, $\Sigma$ is a finite set of input symbols, $\delta \in Q \times \Sigma \to Q$ is the transition function, $q_0 \in Q$ is the initial state, and $F \subseteq Q$ is the set of final states), and a context-free grammar as a quadruple $G = (V, \Sigma, P, S)$ (where $V$ is a finite set of non-terminal symbols, $\Sigma$ is a finite set of terminal symbols, $P$ is a finite set of production rules, and $S \in V$ is the start symbol).

A context-free grammar $G = (V, \Sigma, P, S)$ is in **Chomsky normal form** if each production rule is of the form:
- $B \to CD$,
- $B \to a$, or
- $S \to \epsilon$,

where $B$ is a non-terminal symbol, $C$ and $D$ are non-terminal symbols other than $S$, $a$ is a terminal symbol, and $\epsilon$ is an empty sequence. We write $\mathcal{L}(\mathcal{A})$ for the language accepted by a deterministic finite automaton $\mathcal{A}$, and $\mathcal{L}(G)$ for the language generated by a context-free grammar $G$.

Answer the following questions:

(1) Let $\mathcal{A} = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, F)$ be a deterministic finite automaton. Give a deterministic finite automaton that accepts the complement of $\mathcal{L}(\mathcal{A})$, i.e., $\Sigma^* \setminus \mathcal{L}(\mathcal{A})$. Here, you may assume that $\delta \in Q \times \Sigma \to Q$ is a total function.

(2) Describe an algorithm that takes a context-free grammar $G$ as an input, and decides whether $L(G) = \emptyset$.

(3) Given a context-free grammar $G = (V, \Sigma, P, S)$ in Chomsky normal form and a deterministic finite automaton $\mathcal{A} = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, F)$, we define a context-free grammar $G_\mathcal{A}$ as follows:

$$
\begin{aligned}
   V_{\mathcal{A}} &= \{ S' \} \cup \{ B_{q,q'} \mid B \in V \land (q, q') \in Q \} \\
   P_{\mathcal{A}} &= \{ B_{q,q'} \to C_{q,q''} D_{q'',q'} \mid (B \to CD \in P) \land (q, q', q'' \in Q) \} \\
   &\cup \{ B_{q,q'} \to a \mid (B \to a \in P) \land (q, q' \in Q) \land (\delta(q, a) = q') \} \\
   &\cup \{ S' \to S_{q_0,q} \mid q \in F \}.
\end{aligned}
$$

Here, assume $S' \notin \{ B_{q,q'} \mid B \in V \land (q, q') \in Q \}$. Prove that $\mathcal{L}(G_\mathcal{A}) = (\mathcal{L}(G) \cap \mathcal{L}(\mathcal{A})) \setminus \{\epsilon\}$ holds.

(4) Give a method to decide, given a context-free grammar $G$ in Chomsky normal form and a deterministic finite automaton $\mathcal{A}$ as inputs, whether or not $\mathcal{L}(G) \subseteq \mathcal{L}(\mathcal{A})$ holds. You may use the results of questions (1), (2), and (3).

## **Kai**
### (1)
Given DFA $\mathcal{A} = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, F)$, give an automaton accepting complement of $\mathcal{L(A)}$, i.e. $\Sigma^*\setminus\mathcal{L(A)}$.

Let $\mathcal{A}' = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, Q\setminus F)$
Now, $w \in \mathcal{L(A')}$ iff $\delta(w, q_0) \in (Q\setminus F$) which is occurs only when $w\notin \mathcal{L(A)}$

### (2)
Given CFG $\mathcal{G} = (V, \Sigma, P, S)$, decide wheaterh $\mathcal{L(G)} = \varnothing$.

We call symbol $A\in V$ \emph{generating} if $A\Rightarrow^* w$ for some string $w$ of terminals.
If there's no such string, then $A$ is \emph{nongenerating}.
Language of grammar $\mathcal{G}$ is empty iff start symbol $S$ is nongenerating.
We can find set of generating symbols using the algorithm below.
Symbols that are not marked generating, are nongenerating.
The algorithm:

- Base. Every terminal symbol form $T$ is generating.
- Induction. If for some production $A\rightarrow \alpha$, $\alpha$ is known to be generating, then is $A$.


### (3)
Looks pretty obvious from the construction.
A nice induction'd make it.

### (4)
If $(\mathcal{L(G)}\cap \overline{\mathcal{L(A)}}) = \varnothing$, then $\mathcal{L(G)} \subseteq \mathcal{L(A)}$
We can compute complement based on (Q1), intersection based on (Q3) and check for emptiness based on (Q2).