---
sidebar_label: "2024年2月実施 基礎科目 F1-2"
tags:
  - Kyoto-University
---
# 京都大学 情報学研究科 知能情報学専攻 2024年2月実施 専門科目 F1-2

## **Author**
[itsuitsuki](https://github.com/itsuitsuki)

## **Description (English)**

### Q.1
Consider the following functions $f_1(x)$ and $f_2(x)$.

$$
f_1(x) = \begin{cases} x\sin\left(\frac{1}{x}\right) & (x \neq 0) \\ 0 & (x = 0) \end{cases}
$$

$$
f_2(x) = \begin{cases} x^2\sin\left(\frac{1}{x}\right) & (x \neq 0) \\ 0 & (x = 0) \end{cases}
$$

(1) Evaluate whether $f_1(x)$ and $f_2(x)$ are differentiable, respectively.
(2) Evaluate whether their derivatives ${f_1}'(x)$ and ${f_2}'(x)$ are continuous at $x = 0$, respectively.

### Q.2
Evaluate the directional differentiability and continuity of the following function.

$$
f(x, y) = \begin{cases} \frac{xy^2}{x^2 + y^4} & (\text{Either } x \neq 0 \text{ or } y \neq 0) \\ 0 & (\text{Both } x = 0 \text{ and } y = 0) \end{cases}
$$

### Q.3
Compute the volume in the $xyz$-space for each of the following conditions.

(1) Under the surface $z = e^x \cos(y)$ and over the rectangle defined by $D = [0, 1] \times \left[0, \frac{\pi}{2}\right]$ on the $xy$-plane.
(2) Under the surface of the paraboloid $z = 1 - x^2 - y^2$ and over the $xy$-plane.

## **Kai**
### Q.1

(1)
$$
\lim_{h\to 0}{f_1(h)-f_1(0)\over h}=\lim_{h\to 0}{h\sin(\frac1h)\over h}=\lim_{h\to 0}{\sin(\frac1h)}
$$
does not exist. Hence $f_1$ is not differentiable.
$$
\lim_{h\to 0}{f_2(h)-f_2(0)\over h}=\lim_{h\to 0}{h^2\sin(\frac1h)\over h}=\lim_{h\to 0}h\sin(\frac1h)=0
$$
by Squeezing theorem. Hence $f_2$ is differentiable.

(2)

At $x=0$, $f_1'(x)$ does not exist, so it is not continuous.

From (1), $f'_2(0)=0$ and $\lim_{x\to 0}f_2'(x)=\lim_{x\to 0}(2x\sin{\frac1x}-\cos{\frac1x})$ does not exist, so $f'_2$ is also not continuous at $x=0$.

### Q.2

We have $\lim_{h\to0}{f(h,0)-f(0,0)\over h}=0$ and $\lim_{h\to0}{f(0,h)-f(0,0)\over h}=0$. So $f$ is directionally differentiable at $x$ and $y$ axes.

By
$$
\lim_{x=y^2,x\to 0}{xy^2\over x^2+y^4}=\frac12,
$$
and
$$
\lim_{x=0,y\to 0}{xy^2\over x^2+y^4}=0\ne \frac12,
$$
limit of $f$ along different paths to $(0,0)$ is different, which means the limit does not exist. Hence $f$ is not continuous.

### Q.3

(1)
$$
V=\int_0^1\int_0^{\pi/2}e^x\cos (y)\dd y\dd x
=\int_0^1e^x\dd x\int_0^{\pi/2}\cos y
=e-1.
$$
(2)

The partial surface to be integrated is
$$
S=\{(x,y)|x^2+y^2\le 1\}.
$$
Let $x=r\cos \theta,y=r\sin\theta$, $r\in[0,1]$ and $\theta\in[0,2\pi)$.
$$
\begin{aligned}
V&=\iint_{(x,y)\in S}z\dd x\dd y\\
&=\iint_{(r,\theta)\in S}(1-r^2)|J|\dd r\dd \theta
\\&=\int_0^{2\pi}\int_0^1(1-r^2)r\dd r\dd \theta
\\&=2\pi \int_0^1(r-r^3)\dd r
\\&=2\pi (\frac12-\frac14)={\pi\over 2}.
\end{aligned}
$$




