---
sidebar_label: '2016年2月実施 問題3'
sidebar_position: 7
tags:
  - Tokyo-University
---
# 東京大学 情報理工学系研究科 コンピュータ科学専攻 2016年2月実施 問題3

## **Author**
[kainoj](https://github.com/kainoj/utokyo-cs), 祭音Myyura

## **Description**
Answer the following questions concerning binary search trees. Here, the *height* of a node is defined as the maximum of the graph distance from the node to one of its descendant leaf nodes. For example, a node with no children is of height 0. The *height* of a tree is defined as the height of its root.

(1) Suppose that we have the following binary search tree.

```text
         9
       /   \
      4     12
     / \   /  \
    2   7 10  14
       /
      6
```

Let us apply the following operations to the above tree, in the shown order.

- (i) Insert 3
- (ii) Insert 8
- (iii) Delete 4
- (iv) Delete 9

Depict the state of the tree after each operation.

(2) Answer the minimum and maximum tree heights of a binary search tree with $n$ nodes.

We call a binary search tree *balanced* if every node of it satisfies the following conditions:

- In case the node has two children, the heights of the left and right child subtrees differ by at most $1$.
- In case the node has only one child, the height of the child subtree is $0$.

Answer the following questions.

(3) Answer the minimum and maximum tree heights of a balanced binary search tree with $7$ nodes. Depict a tree with the maximum height, and one with the minimum height.

(4) Answer the minimum tree height of a balanced binary search tree with $n$ nodes.

(5) Show that the height of a balanced binary search tree with $n$ nodes is no more than $2\log_2 n$.

## **Kai**
### (1)
#### (i)
```text
          9
       /    \
      4      12
    /   \    /  \
   2     7  10  14
    \   /
     3 6
```

#### (ii)
```text
          9
       /     \
      4       12
    /   \    /  \
   2     7  10  14
    \   / \
     3 6   8
```

#### (iii)
```text
          9
       /     \
      3       12
    /   \    /  \
   2     7  10  14
        / \
       6   8
```

#### (iv)
```text
          8
       /     \
      3       12
    /   \    /  \
   2     7  10  14
        /
       6   
```

### (2)
Minimum height of BST with $n$ nodes is $\lfloor \log_2n\rfloor$.
Maximum height: $n-1$.

### (3)
AVL tree with $7$ nodes has min. height of $2$ (full binary tree), and max. height of $3$. See following:

```text
            3
        /       \
       2         1
     /   \     /
    1     0   0
   /
  0
```

### (4)
Just $\lfloor \log_2n\rfloor$ – it's a full binary tree.

### (5)
Show that the height of a balanced binary tree (AVL) with $n$ nodes is no more than $2\log_2n$.

Let's consider the smallest possible AVL trees wrt number of nodes.
Let $N(h)$ indicate minimum number of nodes in a balanced tree of height $h$.
The minimum tree of $n$ nodes and height $h$ consists of a root, a *minimum* subtree of of height $h-1$ and a *minimum* subtree of height $h-2$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    n = N(h) &= 1 + N(h-1) + N(h-2) \\
            &\geq 1 + 2 \cdot N(h-2) && \text{because } N(h) > N(h-1) \\ 
            &> 2 \cdot N(h-2) \\
            &\geq 2^{\frac{h}{2}}
\end{aligned}
$$

Taking log both sides: $h \leq 2\cdot \log_2(n)$.