---
comments: false
title: 東京大学 情報理工学系研究科 コンピュータ科学専攻 2019年2月実施 問題4
tags:
  - Tokyo-University
  - Linear-Algebra
---
# 東京大学 情報理工学系研究科 コンピュータ科学専攻 2019年2月実施 問題4

## **Author**
[kainoj](https://github.com/kainoj/utokyo-cs)

## **Description**
Consider an $n$ dimensional linear system $Ax = b$, where $A$, $x$, and $b$ are an $n$ dimensional real coefficient matrix, an $n$ dimensional real vector of unknowns, and an $n$ dimensional real given vector, respectively.
Assume that $A$ is not singular and $b \neq 0$.
The vector norm and the matrix norm used in this problem are the 2-norm and the matrix norm corresponding to the 2-norm, respectively.

Answer the following questions.

(1) Answer the definition of the *condition number* of $A$.

(2) Suppose that $\widetilde{x} \neq 0$ is an approximate solution of the linear system.
Using the residual $r = b - A\widetilde{x}$ and $\widetilde{x}$, find a rank $1$ matrix $E$ which satisfies $(A+E)\widetilde{x} = b$ exactly.

(3) Consider the effect of inaccuracy $\delta A$ of $A$. Namely, the linear system becomes

$$
(A + \delta A)(x + \delta x) = b,
$$

where $\delta x$ is the effect on the solution vector $x$.
Assume that $A + \delta A$ is not singular.
In addition, $\delta A$ has nothing to do with $E$ in the question (2).
By evaluating $\delta x$, prove that the relative inaccuracy of $x$ is related to that of $A$ by the inequality:

$$
\frac{\|\delta x\|}{\| x+\delta x \|} \leq \text{cond}_2(A) \frac{\|\delta A \|}{\| A \|},
$$

where $\text{cond}_2(A)$ is the condition number of $A$.

(4) Prove that for any $n$ dimensional real singular matrix $B$, the relation

$$
\| A-B \| \geq \frac{1}{\| A^{-1} \|}
$$

is always satisfied. You may use the following fact: when an $n$ dimensional real matrix $C$ is singular, there is a non-zero real vector $y$ such that $Cy = 0$.

## **Kai**
### (1)
Condition number $\kappa(A)$ of $A$ is:

$$
    \kappa(A) = \|A\| \: \|A^{-1}\|
$$

where $\|\cdot \|$ denotes a norm of a matrix:

$$
    \|A\| = \max_{x\in \mathbb{R^N}} \frac{\|Ax\|}{\|x\|} = \max_{x: \|x\|=1} \|Ax\|
$$

### (2)
Not sure if OK...

We know $Ax = b$ and let $r = b- A\hat{x}$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    (A+E)\hat{x} &= b \\
    A\hat{x} + E\hat{x} &= b \\
    E\hat{x} &= b - A\hat{x} \\
    E\hat{x} &= r
\end{aligned}
$$

But how do we know if $E$ is rank $1$?

### (3)

$$
\begin{aligned}
    (A+ \delta A)(x+ \delta x) = b \\
    Ax + A(\delta x) + \delta A(x+ \delta x) = b
\end{aligned}
$$

Substituting $Ax = b$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    A(\delta x) + \delta A(x+ \delta x) &= 0 \\
    - A(\delta x) &= \delta A(x+ \delta x) \\
    -\delta x &= A^{-1} (\delta A)(x+ \delta x)
\end{aligned}
$$

because matrix $A$ is not singular, so inverse $A^{-1}$ exist.
Now, take the norm both sides.
We are assuming that $A + \sigma A$ is not singular, so it has inverse and thus a norm:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \|\delta x \| &= \| A^{-1} \: [\delta A(x+ \delta x) ]\| \\
      &\leq \| A^{-1} \|  \: \| \delta A(x+ \delta x) \| \\
      &\leq \| A^{-1} \|  \: \| \delta A \| \: \| x + \delta x \|
\end{aligned}
$$

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \frac{\|\delta x \|}{ \| x + \delta x \| } &\leq \| A^{-1} \|  \: \| \delta A \| \\
    &= \| A^{-1} \| \:  \frac{\| A^{1} \| }{\| A^{1} \|} \| \delta A \| \\
    &= \kappa(A) \frac{\|\delta A\|}{\|A\|}
\end{aligned}
$$

### (4)
When an $n$ dimensional real matrix C is singular, there is a non-zero, real vector $y$ such that $Cy = 0$. 
*In particular*, we can choose a unit vector $y' = \frac{y}{\|y\|}$. 

Let $x \in nullspace(B)$ be a unit vector i.e. $Bx = 0$ and $\|x\| = 1$.

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \|A-B\| &= \|A-B\| \: \|x\| \\
            &\geq \| (A-B)x \| \\
            &= \|Ax - Bx\| \\
            &= \|Ax\|
\end{aligned}
$$

On the other hand:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    1 = \|x\| = \| A^{-1} \:(Ax) \| &\leq \| A^{-1} \| \: \|Ax\| \\
    \|Ax\| &\geq \frac{1}{\|A^{-1}\|}
\end{aligned}
$$

More on condition numbers: https://blogs.mathworks.com/cleve/2017/07/17/what-is-the-condition-number-of-a-matrix/.