---
comments: false
title: 東京大学 情報理工学系研究科 コンピュータ科学専攻 2018年2月実施 問題4
tags:
  - Tokyo-University
---
# 東京大学 情報理工学系研究科 コンピュータ科学専攻 2018年2月実施 問題4

## **Author**
[kainoj](https://github.com/kainoj/utokyo-cs)

## **Description**
In this problem, we consider mutual exclusion of concurrent processes running on a multiprocessor system. Assume that the execution of the code `x = x + 1` consists of the following three operations:

- (i) load the initial value of `x` to a register `R` from a memory address `A`,  
- (ii) add 1 to `R`, and  
- (iii) store the value of `R` to `A`.

Answer the following questions.

(1) Consider the case where two processes share a variable `x` and execute `x = x + 1` concurrently on this multiprocessor system without mutual exclusion.
Assuming that the initial value of `x` is $0$, answer all the possible values of `x` after both the processes complete the executions of `x = x + 1`.

(2) A standard way to achieve mutual exclusion of the executions of `x = x + 1` is to use the `TestAndSet` instruction as in the following C code:

```text
while (TestAndSet(&lock));
x = x + 1;
lock = 0;
```

Here, `x` and lock are shared variables, whose initial values are $0$. The `TestAndSet` instruction, with hardware support, atomically executes the functionality that is described by the following C code. Answer appropriate expressions that fill the blanks from (A) to (E).

```text
int TestAndSet(int *a) {
    int b;
    (A) = (B);
    (C) = (D);
    return (E);
}
```

(3) An alternative way to achieve mutual exclusion is to use another atomic instruction `Swap`, whose functionality is described by the following C code:

```text
void Swap(int *a, int *b) {
    int tmp = *a;
    *a = *b;
    *b = tmp;
}
```

Using the `Swap` instruction, mutual exclusion of the executions of `x = x + 1` can be achieved as follows:

```text
int key = (F);
while ((G) == 1)
    Swap((H), (I));
x = x + 1;
lock = 0;
```

Here, `x` and `lock` are shared variables whose initial values are $0$, and `key` is a local variable.
Answer appropriate expressions that fill the blanks from (F) to (I).

## **Kai**
### (1)
Its $1$ and $2$.
On a sequential execution we get $2$.
We can get $1$ when one process loads a value before another process stores it.

### (2)
Test-and-set writes $1$ to memory and returns previously stored value.

```text
int TestAndSet(int *a) {
    int b;
    b = *a;
    *a = 1;
    return b;
}
```

### (3)
Swap:

```
void Swap(int *a, int *b) {
    int tmp = *a;
    *a = *b;
    *b = tmp;
}
```

Answer:

```
int key = 1;
while (key == 1)
    Swap(&key, &lock);
x = x + 1;
lock = 0;
```
