---
comments: false
title: 東京大学 情報理工学系研究科 コンピュータ科学専攻 2018年2月実施 問題1
tags:
  - Tokyo-University
  - Linear-Algebra
---
# 東京大学 情報理工学系研究科 コンピュータ科学専攻 2018年2月実施 問題1

## **Author**
[kainoj](https://github.com/kainoj/utokyo-cs)

## **Description**
In this problem, $\mathbb{R}$ represents the set of real numbers, and $\mathbb{R}^N$ represents the set of real column vectors of length $N$. For $\boldsymbol{v} \in \mathbb{R}^N$, $\boldsymbol{v}^\top$ denotes its transpose. Let $I$ be the $N \times N$ identity matrix.

Consider an eigensystem of a real $N \times N$ symmetric matrix $A$,

$$
A\boldsymbol{x} = \lambda \boldsymbol{x},
$$

where $\lambda$ and $\boldsymbol{x}$ are an eigenvalue and a corresponding eigenvector, respectively.

Let $\lambda_{\text{max}}(M)$ be the maximum of eigenvalues of matrix $M$.

You may use the following facts on the eigenvalues and the eigenvectors of a real $N \times N$ symmetric matrix without proofs:

- There are $N$ independent eigenvectors that form an orthogonal basis.
- Every eigenvalue is a real number.

Answer the following questions.

(1) Prove that if $\boldsymbol{x}$ is an eigenvector of $A$, it is also an eigenvector of $A + \mu I$ for any $\mu \in \mathbb{R}$.

(2) Prove that

$$
\lambda_{\text{max}}(A) = \max \{\boldsymbol{v}^\top A\boldsymbol{v} \mid \boldsymbol{v} \in \mathbb{R}^N, \, \boldsymbol{v}^\top \boldsymbol{v} = 1\}.
$$

(3) Prove that

$$
\boldsymbol{v}^\top \big(\lambda_{\text{max}}(A)I - A\big)\boldsymbol{v} \geq 0
$$

for any $\boldsymbol{v} \in \mathbb{R}^N$.

(4) Suppose that matrix $B$ is also an $N \times N$ real symmetric matrix. Prove that

$$
\lambda_{\text{max}}(A + B) \leq \lambda_{\text{max}}(A) + \lambda_{\text{max}}(B).
$$

## **Kai**
### (1)
Let $x$ be an eigenvector with corresponding eigenvalue $\lambda$: $Ax = \lambda x$.
Let $\mu \in \mathbb{R}$.

$$
(A + \mu I)x = Ax + \mu x = \lambda x + \mu x = (\lambda + \mu)x
$$

So $x$ is an eigenvector of $(A + \mu I)$ with corresponding eigenvalue of $\lambda + \mu$.


### (2)
Let $v \in \mathbb{R^N}$ be a unit vector which maximizes $v^T A v$.
Because $A$ is real and symmetric, then it can be diagonalized $A = Q^T \Lambda Q$, where $Q$ is orthogonal matrix, which columns form orthogonal basis.
In following equation, let's substitute $y = Qv$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    v^T A v &= v^T Q^T \Lambda Q v = y^T \Lambda y \\
            &= \sum_{i=1}^{N}\lambda_i y_i^2\\
            &\leq \: \sum_{i=1}^{N} \lambda_{max}(A) \: y_i^2
              = \lambda_{max}(A) \: \sum_{i=1}^{N} y_i^2\\
            &= \lambda_{max}(A) \: y^T y = \lambda_{max}(A) \: v^T Q^T Q v\\
            &= \lambda_{max}(A)
\end{aligned}
$$

On the other hand, let $x_{max}$ be eigenvector corresponding to $\lambda_{max}(A)$.
Because $v$ maximizes $v^T A v$, then:

$$
v^T A v \geq x_{max}^T (A x_{max} ) = x_{max}^T  x_{max} \: \lambda_{max}(A)  = \lambda_{max}(A)
$$

Here we got:

$$
\lambda_{max}(A) \leq v^T A v \leq \lambda_{max}(A)
$$

For vector $v$ which maximizes $v^T A v$.
Hence,

$$
\lambda_{max}(A) = \max \{v^T A v | v\in\mathbb{R}^N, v^T v = 1\}
$$

and the maximum is reached for eigenvector $x_{max}$.

### (3)
Let $v\in\mathbb{R}^N$.
From question (2) we know that $v^T A v\leq \lambda_{max}(A) v^T v$ for arbitrary $v$: look at second to the last line of Q2 calculations.
Now if we know that fact, we get the inequality trivially:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    v^T(\lambda_{max}(A) I - A) v 
        = \lambda_{max}(A) v^T v - v^T A v
        \geq 0
\end{aligned}
$$

### (4)
Since $A, B$ are symmetric and real, then $A = Q^T\Lambda_A Q$ and $B = P^T\Lambda_B P$ for some orthogonal $Q$~and~$P$.
From what we obtained in (Q2): let $w$ be a~unit vector which maximizes $w^T(A+B)w$.
Then:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \Lambda_{max}(A+B) &= w^T(A+B)w \\
                        &= w^T A w + w^T B w \\
                        &= w^T Q^T \Lambda_A Q w + w^T P^T \Lambda_B P w = (*)
\end{aligned}
$$

Substitute $y = Qw$ and $z = Pw$. Of course $y^T y = z^T z = 1$, because $y^T y = w^TQ^TQw = w^T w = 1$ (the same for $z$).
Combining this and our knowledge form previous questions:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    (*) &= y^T \Lambda_A y + z^T \Lambda_B z \\
            &\leq \lambda_{max}(A) \: y^T y + \lambda_{max}(B) \: z^T z \\
            &= \lambda_{max}(A) + \lambda_{max}(B)
\end{aligned}
$$