---
sidebar_label: "2024年8月実施 情報学基礎 F1-2"
tags:
  - Kyoto-University
  - Calculus
---
# 京都大学 情報学研究科 知能情報学専攻 2024年8月実施 情報学基礎 F1-2

## **Author**
[itsuitsuki](https://github.com/itsuitsuki)

## **Description (English)**

In the questions below, $\log x$ denotes the natural logarithm of $x$, and $e$ denotes Napier's constant (the base of the natural logarithm).

### Q.1 
Answer the following questions. Derivations must be clearly shown.

(1) Let $n$ be a positive integer. Compute the $n$-th derivative of $f(x) = x^2e^{-x}$.

(2) Compute the following limit.

$$
 \lim_{x \to \frac{\pi}{2}-0} \log(\tan x)^{\cos x} 
$$


### Q.2 
Compute the volume common to a sphere $x^2 + y^2 + z^2 \leq 36$ and a cylinder $x^2 + y^2 \leq 9$, $-\infty < z < \infty$. Derivation must be clearly shown.

### Q.3 
Answer the following questions.

(1) Show that the inequality

$$
 0 < e - \sum_{k=0}^{n} \frac{1}{k!} < \frac{3}{2(n+1)!} 
$$


holds for any positive integer $n$.

(2) Show that $e$ is an irrational number using the inequality in (1).

## **Kai**
### Q.1
#### (1)

Since
$$
f(x)=x^2e^{-x},\quad f'(x)=2xe^{-x}-x^2e^{-x},\\ f''(x)=2e^{-x}-4xe^{-x}+x^2e^{-x},f'''(x)=-6e^{-x}+6xe^{-x}-x^2e^{-x},
$$
let the $n$-th derivative be
$$
f^{(n)}(x)=a_ne^{-x}+b_nxe^{-x}+(-1)^nx^2e^{-x},
$$
where
$$
a_0=a_1=0,\quad b_0=0,b_1=2.
$$

Then
$$
f^{(n+1)}(x)=-a_ne^{-x}+b_ne^{-x}-b_nxe^{-x}+2\cdot (-1)^n xe^{-x}+(-1)^{n+1}x^2e^{-x}
$$
and therefore
$$
a_{n+1}=b_n-a_n,\quad b_{n+1}=2(-1)^n-b_n\implies b_n=2(-1)^{n-1}n
$$
so
$$
a_{n+1}=2(-1)^{n-1}n-a_n=2(-1)^{n+1}n-a_n\implies {a_{n+1}\over (-1)^{n+1}}=2n+{a_n\over (-1)^n}\\\implies {a_n\over (-1)^n}=0+2(0+1+\dots+(n-1))=n^2-n\implies a_n=(-1)^n (n^2-n)
$$
Hence
$$
f^{(n)}(x)=(-1)^n(n^2-n)e^{-x}-2(-1)^nxe^{-x}+(-1)^nx^2e^{-x}.
$$

#### (2)

詳しく書いてくれる方が居って頂ければ幸いです。自分が時間不足なので暫く略します。
$u=\sec x$ とする。

### Q.2

詳しく書いてくれる方が居って頂ければ幸いです。自分が時間不足なので暫く略します。

$(288-108\sqrt 3)\pi$

cylinder coordinates $(x=r\cos\theta,y=r\sin\theta,z=z)$ and $V=\int_{範囲}\int_0^{2\pi}\int_0^{R=6} r\mathrm dr\mathrm d\theta\mathrm dz$

### Q.3
#### (1)
Since $\forall k\in\Z^+,\quad \frac1{k!}>0$,
$$
\sum_{k=0}^n {1\over k!} < \sum_{k=0}^{+\infty} {1\over k!} = e, \forall n=1,2,\dots
$$
we have $0<e-\sum_{k=0}^n\frac1{k!}$.

And since
$$
\begin{aligned}
e-\sum_{k=0}^n \frac1{k!} &= {1\over (n+1)!} + {1\over (n+2)!} + {1\over (n+3)!} + \dots 
\\ & = {1\over (n+1)!} + {1\over (n+1)!(n+2)} + {1\over (n+1)!(n+2)(n+3)} + \dots
\\ & < {1\over (n+1)!}\left[
1+{1\over n+2} + {1\over (n+2)^2}+\dots
\right]
\\ & = {1\over (n+1)!}\cdot {1\over {n+1\over n+2}}
\\ & = {n+2\over n+1}\cdot \frac1{(n+1)!},
\end{aligned}
$$
and since
$$
\begin{aligned}
{n+2\over n+1}\le \frac32, \forall n=1,2,\dots,
\end{aligned}
$$
we can conclude
$$
e-\sum_{k=0}^n\frac1{k!}<{3\over 2(n+1)!}.
$$

#### (2)

Assume $e$ is rational, setting it $e=p/q$ where $p,q\in\Z^+$ and $\gcd(p,q)=1$.

Then
$$
0<{p\over q}-\sum_{k=0}^n\frac1{k!}<{3\over 2(n+1)!}
$$
where we set $n=q$, and multiply these with $q!$,
$$
0<p(q-1)!-\sum_{k=0}^q \frac{q!}{k!}<{3\over 2(q+1)}<1,\quad q=1,2,\dots
$$
with $p(q-1)!-\sum_{k=0}^q \frac{q!}{k!}$ should be integer but it is in $(0,1)$ by the inequality chain above, thus causing contradiction.

Hence no such $q$ exists, making $e$ irrational.









